---
title: "The education crisis and the poverty of learning (PL) in Peru"
collection: publications
permalink: /publication/2021-02-01-e-1
excerpt: 'Reading is a basic skill that every student should have acquired by the end of primary school. Therefore, it is crucial to ask ourselves how is the quality of the education they receive, focusing on reading skills. This article seeks to introduce learning poverty and to estimate two indicators derived from the FGT method that allow us to better understand the current educational crisis. We found a high incidence rate of learning poverty among children in fourth grade of primary school in 2016 and 2018, mainly from rural and state areas. Because the results are not sufficient to explain the complexity of this situation, two additional measures are presented: the gap and the severity of learning poverty. The results show that between 2016 and 2018 the points needed by students to overcome the poverty line (gap) have increased; as well as the condition has worsened for
those students who suffered to a greater degree from learning poverty (severity).'
date: 2021-02-01
venue: 'Economica'
paperurl: 'https://drive.google.com/file/d/1G9Py1p4xmrvhwBM802iRVaeBIiFjQPIs/view?fbclid=IwAR20FdlJCpqT-vkK09zlgAF7BOscXf_n7A5POIWdUmeD3at3IxvBmiDpYiY'
citation: 'Cóndor, P. y Riega, S. (2020). La crisis de la educación y la pobreza del aprendizaje en el Perú. Economica - Boletín de Investigación N° 7.'
---

The world is in a crisis of education and this is reflected in the educational outcomes of essential skills such as reading. Reading is essential for students as it allows them to develop in school as well as in their social environment. The importance of this skill is reflected in international agreements such as SDG 4. Despite being part of this global commitment to quality education, Peru still presents critical figures regarding the condition of learning. Taking into account learning and schooling deprivation, we estimate the incidence rate, the gap and severity of PL. 

The results allow us to understand that there is an increase in learning deprivation in the country, especially in rural areas and among students attending state schools. This is due to the fact that the already existing gaps are widening and the situation of those with a greater severity in this problem is worsening. 

While there is an urgent commitment by society as a whole to invest more and better in the education of girls and boys, it is necessary that the commitment starts initially from the three levels of government the three levels of government (national and local) in alliance with teachers, parents and the students themselves for the implementation of effective the implementation of effective strategies to mitigate and adapt to the new normality. 

Progress can be achieved by improving infrastructure, strengthening teachers' capacities and incorporating the use of technology. Actions regarding the measurement of learning are necessary. It is not possible to make the PL more visible in greater depth if there is no continuous record of the learning levels achieved by children in the final stage of primary school. Likewise, the lack of assessments with common international standards applied to Peruvian students limits the comparison between countries, a fundamental action to be able to share strategies and methodologies for this common problem.