---
title: "Ni una menos en el mercado laboral : The vulnerability of women's employment in urban Peru in 2020"
collection: publications
permalink: /publication/2023-02-01-sr-1
excerpt: 'Thesis dissertation awarded with the Extraordinary Fund to Support Research by Students of the Faculty of Social Sciences of the PUCP'
#date: 2023-02-01
#venue: ''
#paperurl: ''
#citation: ''
---

The incorporation of women into the labor market has been a silent revolution that has allowed the stability of female labor participation in the last decade, until the arrival of the Covid-19 pandemic in 2020. Although from 2010 to 2019, the female labor force participation rate remained at 64.2%, it decreased by 11.2% in 2020 (Rivera et al., 2021). This leads us to think that while it is true that a considerable part of the labor force is now composed of women (ILO, 2019), the background of this incorporation is of interest in countries where the labor market is an alarming issue, such as Peru. 

It is no surprise that, in Peru, employment levels and the quality of employment are a constant concern. First, because income shocks, which influence household welfare levels in the short and possibly in the long term (Lockshin & Ravallion, 2000), are determined by the wages of the workers in the household. Considering that the Peruvian labor market is characterized by being informal and precarious (Herrera & Rosas, 2003), this makes remunerations more likely to be limited and unstable. 

One way to assess this possible welfare loss is to investigate employment vulnerability, that is, to investigate the risk of welfare loss from possible labor transitions. For the present research, this vulnerability encompasses transitions from employment to unemployment or inactivity, and transitions from good quality employment to poor quality employment (Herrera & Hidalgo, 2002). In particular, we will define job loss, a component of vulnerability, as the risk of transition from employment to unemployment or inactivity, considering both formal and informal workers. 

It is for these reasons that studying labor transitions, especially those related to a loss of welfare, or the possibility of their occurrence, are essential to understand labor market dynamics and their impact on people's lives. However, it is relevant to note that these effects are not the same for everyone, but are differentiated by pre-existing inequalities (Durán, 2022). 

In this sense, it is significant to study the Peruvian population in a disaggregated manner. Not differentiating sufficiently between segments of individuals and households could be hiding important evidence for populations at higher risk (Durán, 2022). In particular, it is relevant to study women, a vulnerable group outside and inside the labor market, in order to understand the specific labor relations that affect them. This is due to the limitations imposed on them in the home because of the sexual division of domestic work and the marked labor segregation in the labor market (Barba et al., 1997).

In this sense, studying the vulnerability of women's employment implies not only investigating the risk of loss of well-being of the households to which they belong, but also the additional risk of loss that women carry, a group especially exposed to the precarious conditions of the labor market and society. 

In order to study this phenomenon, we can consider that understanding vulnerability is an exercise that can be carried out in reverse: knowing who could lose their jobs or reduce the quality of their jobs implies identifying those who have already done so and those who are at risk of doing so. 

Carrying out this exercise requires a type of methodology that allows us to establish a relationship between a group of dependent variables and an independent variable that is not causal. Instead, it must be predictive of an unobservable condition that may materialize in the future as a welfare loss as a result of an employment transition, such as job loss.

 Many policy problems, such as the identification of youth at the highest risk of violence or the identification of teachers who will have the highest added value in students for assignment in schools (Kleinberg et al., 2015), can benefit from these exercises as they have large effects on the welfare of society, for example, through the relocation of resources and implementation of preventive policies (Kleinberg et al., 2015). 

Thus, the objective of this research is to identify women in urban Peru in 2019 who are vulnerable to job loss in 2020. By doing so, we will be able not only to find the percentage of women in the urban EAP belonging to 2019 who would lose their jobs in the following year, but also to characterize these women before they fall into unemployment. 

With this objective, a Machine Learning sparse statistical model, known as Penalized Logit, will be trained to predict women's unemployment risk using the biannual stacked panels built from the National Household Survey Panel from 2016 to 2019. This database will be composed of women belonging to the Economically Active Population (EAP) and their characteristics collected by the different modules (household characteristics, employment and income characteristics, health education, household summary and household member characteristics) in order to use as much information as possible. 

From this estimation, we will estimate the percentage of women in the urban EAP belonging to 2019 who would lose their job the following year according to the trained model. In order to validate this model, available information from 2020 will be used to verify whether the women predicted to lose their jobs in 2019 actually did so in the following year. 

The advantage of using this year for validation is that it allows us to generate public policy recommendations for crisis contexts that seek to prevent unemployment welfare loss among women in urban areas. 
Likewise, this research uses a Machine Learning method that is novel but adequate for the proposed objectives, being a pioneer in labor market research in Peru to the author's knowledge.

In order to obtain a database that allows us to improve the fit of the model, in parallel to what was done by INEI (2020), the database will go through three sequential stages: discarding by percentage of missings that the variables have; generation and transformation of variables, which consists of the process of one-hot-encoding the categorical variables and winsorizing, or transformation of the data by limiting their extreme values of the continuous variables, and the pre-selection of variables through the analysis of their correlations. This last step will be a filter that will allow us to select variables prior to the estimation of the sparse model that also fulfills this function. 

After this, the data will be divided into the training sample (training set) and the test sample (test set) in order to avoid data contamination at the time of training the model. With the first group of observations, and with the purpose of finding the price at which the variance and bias in the regularizing term of the model (λ) are exchanged, we will perform the well-known Stratified Group Cross Validation (CV) method to take into account the distributional complexity of our sample.

Additionally, given the imbalance between classes of our outcome variable (unemployment/inactivity vs. employment), we will apply a resampling method on the training sample known as undersampling to avoid the overestimation of the majority class that this may cause. After having obtained this hyperparameter, we will predict the model in the test sample in order to validate its level of fit as mentioned above. 

We will also characterize these women by generating profiles with the characteristics that proved to be most relevant in the prediction process. To evaluate the robustness of this estimation, we will use another Machine Learning model, Lasso, and another sampling method, Synthetic minority over-sampling tecnhique or SMOTE in the estimation process. 

This research seeks to contribute in the literature as it allows to deepen the study of the loss of female employment in Peru, which is scarce in Peru; as well as the study of women in the labor market, which is necessary due to their precarious conditions (Lavado & Campos, 2021). Specifically, it seeks to generate evidence to contribute to the debate not only on policies that deal with inequalities in unemployment or inactivity suffered by women, but also on policies that promote equitable gender roles such that men and women contribute equally to domestic and care work in the home. 

In this way, the results of the research seek to generate, above all, recommendations for efficient public policies to prevent the loss of well-being of Peruvian women workers. This, through the targeting and characterization of a doubly vulnerable group: women and those vulnerable to job loss or labor inactivity. 

Thus, this methodology allows us to target programs to groups of women vulnerable to unemployment or labor inactivity and prevent the fall in welfare in situations such as the one seen in 2020 as a result of the pandemic. This would allow us, in situations of crisis recovery, to make efficient use of the public budget of the Peruvian State. Likewise, this methodology allows us to characterize women at risk by limiting the set of characteristics relevant to their identification.

